good morning welcome to breakfast with
rachel burden and charlie state
our headlines today the row over covered
vaccines and the irish border the
european
union says it will control the movement
of jabs between the republic and
northern ireland
but then backtracks hours later
the prime minister publishes an open
letter to parents saying he's in awe of
the way they're coping
with homeschooling confusion over
coronavirus rules in maternity wards
midwives warn a lack of clarity means
some staff are being abused
good morning spectators will be
returning to top flight tennis but only
down under for the time being
the organisers of next month's
australian open confirm they will be
letting in 30 000 fans a day
hey mr angelotti how are you hi mark how
are you
and how football clubs are increasing
their efforts to connect with vulnerable
supporters
during the latest lockdown good morning
there's a big mixture of weather on the
way today with heavy rain moving
northwards across england probably
turning to snow for some in wales and
the west midlands
scotland and northern ireland having a
day of sunshine and showers it is
going to be a very busy morning here at
the bbc weather centre join me for a
full forecast a little bit later on
good morning it's saturday the 30th of
january our top story this morning then
amid a growing row
over the supply of kovic 19 vaccines to
the eu
officials will today give more details
on the restrictions they will put in
place
it comes after brussels first warned it
would impose controls
on the movement of vaccines over the
irish border and then
backtracked just hours later late last
night the authorities warned the
measures which were set out in the
brexit agreement
could still be imposed if necessary our
island correspondent chris page has the
story
the irish border was probably the most
serious obstacle
on the road to brexit the uk and the eu
believed keeping it open was vital for
the peace process in northern ireland
the solution was to put in place some
checks on goods arriving
into northern ireland from the rest of
the uk
that meant no controls on the frontier
with the irish republic
yesterday brussels said it would trigger
an emergency clause in that agreement
known as article 16. it allows parts of
the deal to be overridden
in exceptional circumstances eu states
are getting powers to block
covet vaccines from being exported the
european commission believed
northern ireland could be used as a back
door to bring deuces into britain
all parties in northern ireland strongly
criticized the commission
boris johnson and the irish prime
minister michael martin
made their strong concerns known the eu
announced it wouldn't use the emergency
clause after all
but unionists weren't impressed what the
eu
did in first of all wanting to implement
article 16 and override parts of the
protocol was to demonstrate that his
whole approach to northern ireland has
been based
on a hypocrisy and a falsehood for the
last number of years
a big diplomatic crisis has been avoided
but the events may have implications for
sensitive political relationships
in belfast london and brussels chris
pidge
bbc news belfast the prime minister has
published an open letter to parents
saying he's in awe
of how they're coping he also promises
hundreds of millions of pounds will be
spent on a national education
catch-up program after the pandemic
here's our education editor branwyn
jeffries
it's tough for millions of parents right
now
trying to help children learn at home
schools in england are mainly closed
until
march today boris johnson said he
couldn't thank parents enough
he said they're buying time for
vaccination and that's saving lives
only a few children are still learning
in school
parents and teachers are worried about
lost learning
there is a promise in the letter of
hundreds of millions of pounds for
catch-up
but it's going to be a big job one of
the schools i have responsibility for
fantastic place
serves a very deprived community only 30
of those families have access to
broadband in that area only 30
this is digital poverty in a really
extreme way
and it means that many children despite
the very best efforts of schools and
teachers
still cannot connect with that learning
this warehouse
is getting laptops to kids more than
eight hundred thousand
so far but not every child will have
somewhere quiet to work
or parents able to give them lots of
time
leading to fears that children could pay
a heavy price in this pandemic
brownman jefferies bbc news
a team of scientists from the world
health organisation has spent a second
day in the chinese city of wuhan
where kovite 19 was first discovered to
investigate the origins of the pandemic
our china correspondent steve mcdonald
joins us now from the city stephen very
good morning to you
there's a lot of fascination as to how
this is working
in practice for those investigators can
you
give us a sense of what they're doing
literally in the hours they're there
yeah well this is their second full day
out of quarantine
they can now have face-to-face meetings
with people and do these so-called field
trips so they've come here to the jin
yin-tan
hospital now the reason they've come
here is that doctors
here are infectious diseases specialists
and they dealt with some of the earliest
cases
here in wuhan some of the earliest
transmissions of the coronavirus
also crucially doctors here have written
a paper for the prestigious medical
journal the lancet
about the earliest case detected so far
in wuhan this is somebody traced
right back to the first of december so
of course you can understand why the
scientists on this team
might want to speak to the doctors here
what do we know about the access they
have and
what restrictions are they working under
well they've got a couple of problems
one is that apart from
doing your sort of quarantine in china
for the next
couple of weeks you're still restricted
in terms of how many people you can
speak to where you can go
so they can have these sort of meetings
with special
people but they can't mix freely in the
general public for another two weeks and
that's going to
basically take up all their time here so
they're based in a
hotel on the sort of outskirts of the
city a sprawling complex around the lake
people will come there and they'll have
their meetings and other than that they
get in buses and come to places like the
hospital here
i imagine they just go through the
corridors have their meeting
back on the bus and then back to the
hotel the other problem they have of
course is that their
chinese hosts are controlling everything
in a way so whatever they want to do
has to be cleared by the chinese
authorities now
questions are being asked about whether
or not
all information is being passed on or if
they can get all the access they
need but so far the scientists have said
they haven't had a problem that the
people they want to speak to
they can speak to they're going to go
for example in the coming days
to the market where the first cases were
traced back to the seafood market
and even to the lab where there's been
this theory that potentially the
chronovirus might
might have escaped from there now
they're saying they still think that's a
bit of a conspiracy theory
highly unlikely that it's come from the
lab but they've got to show
that they've gone there at least and so
they will at some point be going to that
one
institute where it potentially well some
people would say
the coronavirus leaked from and lastly
stephen i mean
uh for you going back to han uh
given that this is where it all began
what reflections do you have
at that place now
i you wouldn't recognize that if people
came here during the lockdown
now the city of 11 million people is
kind of back to
normal if i could put it to that way
they're
a lot of no average movement around the
streets full of cars the
markets are full of people they haven't
had a single transmission here according
to official figures
for seven months now now everybody will
remember that the lock down here was
very strict for five months
not only in this city but the whole
province of hubei 60 million people
basically had to stay at home well it
seems to have worked it's
crushed the coronavirus for the time
being in this city
and right now the focus in china is more
on the north and in the northeast where
there have been these new outbreaks
but the chinese officials do seem to
have a way of controlling the
coronavirus when it
breaks out by these very localized
lockdowns
a lot of contact tracing and also mass
testing
so though this is the sort of wuhan that
these scientists have entered it's a
place
where basically you wouldn't even know
there'd been a lockdown
uh now other than that they'll be
speaking to the people who were
at the absolute coal face from day one
stephen really interesting talking to
you this morning thank you very much
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc dot co dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with bbc news